11¡¯Sesame Street' chasing away autism's mystery

12Intelligencer, The (Doylestown, PA) - October 25, 2015

13 Author/Byline: Phil Gianficaro, News columnist

14 Section: 00redesign

15 Page: A'


16What I remember are the faces. Wide-eyed and disbelieving. Some mouths twisted, others agape. Ten-year-old faces shocked and puzzled from witnessing the emotional meltdown of a teammate and friend. Worried faces grasping for answers to the confusing maelstrom before them. Madness blew in on a warm summer day. The boy struck out on a called third strike. He instantly became enraged, his neurological condition preventing him from controlling himself. After slamming his bat to the dusty ground, he flung it. He yelled at the home plate umpire, and then began to cry. He rushed to the backstop, kicked it several times and gripped the fencing and began screaming as he shook it repeatedly. The boy's teammates were shocked. His father rushed to him, and finger by trembling finger pried his hands from the backstop and took him home. His teammates were aghast. The boy has autism. High-functioning, but on the spectrum just the same. We coaches gathered our players to explain what had occurred, why it happened, why the boy's outburst wasn't his fault, and why they shouldn't treat him differently because of it. The players nodded, but in a way one does when hearing but not fully understanding. "Sesame Street," the long-running, award-winning, children's educational television program, is hoping to change all that. The program will expose children to autism while they're young. The plan is to teach children about this complex neurobehavioral disorder that includes, as our players witnessed, impairments in social interaction and self-control. The hope is that showing children that those with autism are just like other kids, but who only learn a little differently, replaces the questioning faces with nods of understanding. An example of early education shattering barriers. Julia, the newest Muppet character on "Sesame Street," has autism. In an initiative

launched Wednesday in an online digital storybook, "We're Amazing, 1, 2, 3," she joins Elmo and his friend, Abby Cadabby. If the show's producers receive positive feedback from the autism community, they plan to introduce Julia in the television version of "Sesame Street." In the digital storybook, which can be viewed for free at www.autism.sesamestreet.org, Elmo explains to Abby that Julia plays differently than they do, and helps Abby understand. When Julia places her hands over her ears because a noisy blender in Hooper's Store bothers her, Elmo explains to Abby that certain noises bother her that don't bother others. Later, Abby is saddened when Julia ignores her after she calls out to her while she was on a swing. Elmo explains to Abby that Julia doesn't like to talk when she's on the swing. Each confusing question is answered in a way a child can understand. By introducing an autistic character, "Sesame Street" is addressing an epidemic. According to a 2014 report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1 in 68 U.S. children has an autism spectrum disorder. The hope is that by introducing a character with autism to children, and to show how understanding Elmo and the gang are to her, we can get an early jump on the destigmatization of the disorder. The lesson will be to show kids that different is just that, not bad or something to ridicule. "Children with autism are five times more likely to get bullied," said Dr. Jeanette Betancourt, senior vice president at Sesame Workshop. "Our goal is to bring forth what all children share in common, not their differences. Children with autism share in the joy of playing and loving and being friends and being part of a group." Only they do so a little differently. Something our players, and hopefully those who watch Julia, have come to understand. Phil Gianficaro: 215-345-3078; email: pgianficaro@calkins.com; Twitter: @philgianficaro.


1What I remember are the faces. Wide-eyed and disbelieving. Some mouths twisted, others agape. Ten-year-old faces shocked and puzzled from witnessing the emotional meltdown of a teammate and friend. Worried faces grasping for answers to the confusing maelstrom before them.

Madness blew in on a warm summer day. The boy struck out on a called third strike. He instantly became enraged, his neurological condition preventing him from controlling himself. After slamming his bat to the dusty ground, he flung it. He yelled at the home plate umpire, and then began to cry. He rushed to the backstop, kicked it several times and gripped the fencing and began screaming as he shook it repeatedly.

The boy's teammates were shocked. His father rushed to him, and finger by trembling finger pried his hands from the backstop and took him home. His teammates were aghast.

The boy has autism. High-functioning, but on the spectrum just the same. We coaches gathered our players to explain what had

occurred, why it happened, why the boy's outburst wasn't his fault, and why they shouldn't treat him differently because of it. The players nodded, but in a way one does when hearing but not fully understanding.

"Sesame Street," the long-running, award-winning, children's educational television program, is hoping to change all that. The program will expose children to autism while they're young. The plan is to teach children about this complex neurobehavioral disorder that includes, as our players witnessed, impairments in social interaction and self-control. The hope is that showing children that those with autism are just like other kids, but who only learn a little differently, replaces the questioning faces with nods of understanding. An example of early education shattering barriers.

Julia, the newest Muppet character on "Sesame Street," has autism. In an initiative launched Wednesday in an online digital storybook, "We're Amazing, 1, 2, 3," she joins Elmo and his friend, Abby Cadabby. If the show's producers receive positive feedback from the autism community, they plan to introduce Julia in the television version of "Sesame Street."

In the digital storybook, which can be viewed for free at www.autism.sesamestreet.org, Elmo explains to Abby that Julia plays differently than they do, and helps Abby understand. When Julia places her hands over her ears because a noisy blender in Hooper's Store bothers her, Elmo explains to Abby that certain noises bother her that don't bother others. Later, Abby is saddened when Julia ignores her after she calls out to her while she was on a swing. Elmo explains to Abby that Julia doesn't like to talk when she's on the swing. Each confusing question is answered in a way a child can understand.

By introducing an autistic character, "Sesame Street" is addressing an epidemic. According to a 2014 report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1 in 68 U.S. children has an autism spectrum disorder. The hope is that by introducing a character with autism to children, and to show how understanding Elmo and the gang are to her, we can get an early jump on the destigmatization of the disorder. The lesson will be to show kids that different is just that, not bad or something to ridicule.

"Children with autism are five times more likely to get bullied," said Dr. Jeanette Betancourt, senior vice president at Sesame Workshop. "Our goal is to bring forth what all children share in common, not their differences. Children with autism share in the joy of playing and loving and being friends and being part of a group."

Only they do so a little differently.

Something our players, and hopefully those who watch Julia, have come to understand.